Advertising.
Marketing.
Positioning.
Promotion.
Businesses use all of these
strategies to stand out in an
increasingly global crowd.
And today's high tech,
multimedia environment
provides companies endless
opportunities to hawk their
products to potential
customers.
With financial stakes higher
and competition stiffer,
businesses are devoting more
of their time, energy, and
resources to making a name for
themselves and their products.
But in the quest to sell their
wares, have companies also
sold their souls?
When does advertising's attempt
to be creative,
persuasive, and bold cross the
ethical line of being truthful
and informative?
In this program we'll examine
the role advertising plays in
today's society and look at how
businesses consider its
consequences.
This is Today's Life Choices:
Challenges for Our Times.
This is an historical moment.
Focuses the attention
of the President
of the United States.
Many Americans are distraught at
the rollback of some of the
protection zone.
They've gotten poorer and
poorer and poorer.
It is about helping people
who are dying.
Being a Palestinian is
a responsibility.
Racism still endures.
The xenophobia still endures.
Advertising has always been
essential to even the smallest
company's success.
After all, how can someone buy
a product or use a service if
they don't know they exist?
In its most basic and most
elaborate forms, advertising
should be informative and
provide customers with the
essential benefits
about a product.
David Collins spent over 25
years as an executive with
Johnson & Johnson.
One of the main roles of
advertising is information.
That's why people spend a lot of
money on advertising, is to
inform the consumer or the
eventual buyer of the
existence of the product, the
qualities of the product.
And to construct some kind of
scenario where the product
becomes attractive to buy.
But advertising that just
informs would never be watched
beyond once, even if it
were watched then.
So advertising has to add
something more to it.
To be effective, advertising
must also move potential
customers to action by
persuading them to purchase a
particular product or service,
whether they need it or not.
The more difficult issue is the
one that says advertising
should not persuade someone to
buy something they don't need,
because frankly that's in
the eye of the beholder.
I may think that my consumers
need my Sunbeam Mixmaster.
You may think, they've
already got one, why
do they need another?
So there the tendency is, the
people who don't like
advertising at all will
criticize advertisers because
it's persuading people to buy
things they don't need.
Advertisers usually
have four goals.
The first is to create an
awareness of a particular
product, service, or idea.
The second is to establish an
identity or brand name.
The third is to provide
information about the product,
service, or idea in a way that
consumers will remember.
And lastly, the advertisement
must convince the consumer
that he or she will be better
off by using the product.
Many observers think
advertising's mission is
inherently unethical.
Barbara Lippert serves
as the media critic
for New York Magazine.
Advertisers like to think that
it's informative and
beneficial, just the way that
cigarette makers contend that
they're not getting people to
smoke, they're only getting
people to switch brands.
And I assume that some
advertising is beneficial, in
that if you really do need a car
and you read all the print
about ads and you get
information and you decide
from there, then it
is beneficial.
But mostly it's to make you
aware of things that you
wouldn't normally buy.
Since its earliest days,
advertising has been attacked
from all sides using arguments
that still exist today.
Many believe that advertising
has always appealed to a
person's basic motives.
Ron Nahser, president and chief
executive officer of the
Nahser Agency in Chicago,
Illinois, admits there's an
element of truth in
that statement.
As one person described it,
you're looking for buttons to
push inside the consumer.
And you can push buttons that
are not so good for people or
ones that really inspire
people to be better.
The seven deadly sins
were not invented by
the advertising business.
We didn't discover them, and
you can't blame that on us.
But sometimes we're pretty good
at talking about them.
So what we say is that you
have the responsibility.
Do you want to appeal to the
higher nature of people or to
the lower nature of people?
That's a pretty simple
way of talking about
motivation of any kind.
Others recognize advertising
influence, but many claim most
advertising rarely uses
its power responsibly.
Although that charge has been
leveled at advertisers since
the early days of advertising,
it's particularly relevant in
today's society.
If a certain commercial can
persuade someone to buy a
particular brand of laundry
detergent, an ad can also
influence someone's behavior
or attitude.
The age old question of, does
society reflect advertising or
does advertising reflect
society,
may never be answered.
That's the filtering process
of ideas, the ideas of the
marketplace.
And whether it's true in
politics or it's true of the
arts, products, people are
constantly sifting and sorting
about what is important.
What is meaningful.
What do they want to take
into their lives.
We're just a piece of that.
The advertising industry has
grown more sophisticated
during the 20th century.
Many companies used to have
their own advertising, now
often called marketing,
departments that produced
in-house ads and strategies.
Now many businesses work with
outside agencies that
specialize in everything from
print, radio, and television
ads to public relations.
And while many companies have
kept their own departments,
they still rely heavily on the
advice of an agency or
consultant when planning a
campaign or a strategic move.
The agency also helps the
company identify or target
consumers and offers advice
on how best to reach them.
We have a statement of
corporate purpose.
We say we want our advertising
to benefit the user, help our
clients' businesses grow, and
contribute to the well-being
of society.
And so we say, is this message
that we have, is it something
that ultimately adds to the
conversation, adds to the
cultural fabric of this country,
where people say
that's a responsible way
to talk about business?
That was good commerce
and good business.
Before an advertisement reaches
a newspaper, magazine,
billboard, radio station, or
television network, it has
been unofficially scrutinized
at several levels.
First the in-house and/or
outside agency approves it.
Then the client agrees that
it fits the bill.
Oftentimes newspapers,
magazines, radio and
television stations, and
broadcast and cable networks
have advertising standards that
must be met before an ad
or commercial is printed
or aired.
Dan Jaffe serves as executive
vice president of the
Association of National
Advertisers, an organization
that helps its members work
more effectively.
The advertising community has
probably the strongest
self-regulatory system
of any business
entity in this country.
We have something called the
National Advertising division
of the Council of Better
Business Bureaus.
And there are any consumer or
any business can bring cases
if they believe that somebody
is advertising in a false or
deceptive manner.
Government's power over
advertising rests with the
Federal Trade Commission and
its Bureau of Consumer
Protection and the Food and
Drug Administration.
The Federal Communications
Commission, which regulates
the broadcasting and cable
industries, influences
advertising content, yet has
no power over agencies or
print media.
It is extremely important that
government be active in the
advertising area.
Most people see this as
protecting consumers, but an
honest marketplace is
essential for honest
businessmen.
And therefore if advertisers
are not being truthful, are
being deceptive, they are taking
business from honest
advertisers.
And so the business community
has an equal interest in a
strong governmental presence
as do the consumer groups.
Because both want to be sure
that the advertising that's
done there is truthful
and non-deceptive.
Yet despite a system of
self-regulation, criticism of
the advertising industry and
many of its clients abounds.
Many critics focus on
advertisers' often thinly
disguised attempts at
targeting children.
The Children's Television Act,
which was passed by Congress
in 1990, limits advertising in
children's programs to 10 and
1/2 minutes per hour on weekends
and 12 and 1/2
minutes per hour on weekdays.
In addition, advertisements for
toys or products related
to a show's characters or theme
cannot be aired during
the body of the program.
But as most experts will tell
you, children still view an
awful lot of commercials and
what they see has an impact.
Patrick Murphy is a professor of
marketing at the University
of Notre Dame.
There is even a difference
between children and the
teenage years, that there are
certain products obviously
aimed at children.
And their marketers are
very savvy and kind
of going after them.
Parents, though, generally have
their tentacles up and
realize that the child is going
to try to influence them
because the advertiser's trying
to influence the child.
But it's getting harder and
harder for parents to control
what their children see.
Although a new rating system
was supposed to provide
parents a handy tool for
knowing what shows were
appropriate for children,
advertising content is neither
rated or reviewed.
So it's quite possible for a
child to see an inappropriate
commercial within a program
suitable for children.
You can't really regulate it,
because what they don't
realize is that people are
watching everything the way
they normally would watch
the old three networks.
So if you're going to
be buzzing around--
I know any four year old knows
how to use a remote.
You can't really regulate that
properly at what time,
because, especially in cable,
things run all day, things run
for 24 hours, and so children
are going to
come upon these things.
Companies and the agencies that
design advertisements are
also creative, and some would
say sneaky, in designing ads
that subliminally target
children and young adults.
While the product may be geared
toward an adult, the
commercial often appeals to
children, which many say lays
the groundwork for brand
choices later in life.
A recent USA Today Survey
found that most teens
recognized the Marlboro man,
Budweiser's talking
frogs, and Joe Camel.
Since the Surgeon General's
landmark report on smoking in
1964, the tobacco industry has
been fighting an uphill public
relations battle.
Tobacco, although a legal
product for adults to
purchase, is the only product
banned from advertising on
television by Congress.
Since that 1971 ban, the tobacco
industry has poured
its deep advertising budget into
magazines, billboards,
and sponsorship of
sporting events.
Cigarettes are the one product
when used as directed, are
harmful or can kill you.
Where alcohol in moderation or
firearms properly used and
other socially controversial
products have some redeeming
value, if you will, I
think cigarettes are
ones hard to defend.
So I've been a critic for
a number of years.
But I think that the industry
has been very successful in
creating an image, whether it's
the cowboy image or the
Kool image, if you will,
the K-O-O-L is C-O-O-L.
Although the tobacco industry
denies targeting teens and
children, most think
those companies are
just blowing smoke.
After all, the majority of
smokers take up the habit
while in their teens.
And many adult smokers say they
would quit the habit if
they could.
Tobacco advertising has been a
particularly favorite target
of President Bill Clinton, and
recent federal legislation
will try to curb the industry's
veiled attempts to
target young people.
But as Dan Jaffe says, the new
guidelines will be difficult.
if not impossible, to enforce,
and may even
violate the First Amendment.
Tobacco is a legal product.
It's legal to sell to adults.
If the ads are directed to being
sold to adults we think
that the government does
not have the power
to stop their sale.
But if they are targeted to
young people they do, and the
Federal Trade Commission has
stated recently to us that
they are looking at these
issues, and that they will be
active in this area.
And so we support strong
restrictions against targeting
to young people, but we do not
support blanket bans on
tobacco advertising.
Still, most parents, educators,
and public health
officials support the
government's stance against
tobacco advertising.
Although not officially banned
from advertising on
television, the liquor or
distilled spirits industry had
followed a self-imposed policy
of not advertising in the
electronic medium
for 48 years.
But after watching its share of
the market drop steadily,
while the market shares of
beer and wine, both heavy
users of television advertising,
climb, the
distilled spirits industry
plans to change its tune.
Fred Meister, the president and
chief executive officer of
the Distilled Spirits Council of
the United States, says his
organization completed
exhaustive research before
lifting its restrictions
on radio and television
advertising.
Most people thought we were
advertising on television
anyway, because they don't
understand the difference that
beer or wine or say, malt
liquor, which is a form of
beer, that it's really
different
than distilled spirits.
And so they thought we
were advertising.
When we told them we weren't
advertising on television,
they thought there must
be some law or
regulation against it.
And when we said, no, that's not
the case, we're doing it
for voluntary reasons, their
question was why?
Why wouldn't you
use television?
Is there something wrong with
your product, because that's
the accepted way to advertise.
What individuals were concerned
about was not,
therefore, whether we advertise
on television, but
would we do it in a responsible
manner.
And would we avoid targeting
the under-aged.
Some think by not accepting ads
for distilled spirits, the
television and radio industry
is trying to head off an
effort by some congressional
leaders to limit beer and wine
advertising.
The beer industry currently
spends almost $1 billion a
year on television
advertising.
And most beer commercials air
during major sporting events
watched by both children
and adults.
There are 100 million Americans
in the United States
who drink beverage alcohol,
beer wine and distilled
spirits, on a responsible
basis.
And our advertising is directed
to those 100 million
adult consumers, so that we
can bring them information
about our products in the same
way that beer and wine do now.
We are not and never have and
never will direct our
advertising at the under-aged.
Even if the ads aren't
designed to appeal to
children, chances are the
commercials would air during
many televised sporting
events.
Many broadcasters fear that a
backlash against beer and wine
advertising could cost them
millions of dollars.
And also force such major
sporting events as the Super
Bowl and World Series
to pay-per-view.
Still, some lawmakers feel it's
unfair to crack down on
tobacco advertising and
leave alcohol alone.
After all, alcohol consumption
plays a major role in the
three leading causes
of death--
car crashes, homicides,
and suicides--
for young people between
the ages of 16 and 24.
We have always acknowledged the
fact that some people do
abuse our product, and that
those people need to be
educated and everybody needs to
be educated about alcohol.
So we have spent millions of
dollars by the companies, as
well as the industry generally,
to help educate
people, to help develop programs
that would treat
problems.
The tobacco and alcohol
industries aren't the only
advertisers that have
faced the wrath of
parents and child advocates.
Over the last three decades the
fashion industry has also
come under fire for using
ultra-thin models in their
campaigns, thus sending a
message to young girls in
particular and women in general
that thin is in.
And since the number of women
suffering from eating
disorders has skyrocketed over
the last 20 years, social
analysts point to advertising
as a primary culprit.
You don't see overweight people
in advertising or in
the movies generally,
or on television.
And it becomes an unrealistic
kind of role model for them
and they're not old enough--
or they're impressionable
enough, maybe it has more
to do with their
impressionability--
that these kind of messages hit
them harder than it would
a 25 year old woman, if you
will, or somebody who's more
in an adult stage
in their life.
It's the nature of the fashion
industry to push the envelope,
to always be on the
cutting edge.
Fashion ads, like the products
they feature, are often
provocative, bold, sensual,
and striking.
But some critics think fashion
designer Calvin Klein crossed
the line of good taste for the
recent campaign that featured
young models in poses some
felt were pornographic.
Anything beauty and fashion
related has to be on the edge
and has to be provocative,
because that's
what it's all about.
It's about moving the envelope
constantly, and being part of
the sophisticated, provocative
edge and not being in the
mainstream.
And then the problem becomes we
have no mainstream anymore,
everything is edgy and
everything is provocative.
Others said the models'
fashion resembled teen
prostitutes on heroin.
Even though Calvin Klein pulled
the ads after a public
outcry, sales of his jeans rose
to 462 million in 1995
from 113 million the
previous year.
Yet Calvin Klein and advertising
controversy are
old friends.
He's attracted the public's
attention before with previous
jeans and fragrance ads.
A savvy businessman, Klein knows
all too well that an ad
that makes people talk garners
more publicity and exposure
than you pay for.
Yet Klein and his fashion
cohorts are not the only
advertisers who practice the
old axiom sex sells.
Naked or nearly naked bodies
are showing up in ads for
everything from fashion to
furniture and perfume to milk.
As nudity has become more
prevalent in movies and
television, Americans are rarely
shocked by what they
see in ads.
As David Collins points out, our
comfort level has changed.
What we used to think as
absolutely outrageous is now
accepted as normal.
I can remember when I was a
child going into a drugstore
and there would be paperbacks
on the stand and there would
be a picture of a woman
dressed in a negligee.
And I used to think as a child,
this is absolutely
unbelievable.
This is just so exciting.
Today you go to the grocery
store and there are pictures
of women with nothing on,
or men with nothing on.
So the whole norm of acceptable
behavior has eroded
in this country.
Another routine advertising
technique that has often come
under attack is the use of
celebrities to promote and
sell products.
Sports stars, entertainers, and
even politicians who have
left office have pitched
everything from
underwear to cereal.
While advertisers say using a
celebrity adds excitement and
instant credibility to a
product, many think the
practice is unethical,
especially if the star doesn't
regularly use the product.
How big can a logo get on a
shirt before you finally say
that logo is too big.
And so I've taken great
satisfaction over the years
that these things do tend
to ebb and flow.
An advertiser in one sense would
want to have their brand
on the back of a
shirt that big.
Kids finally say, I
don't like that.
Kids, while I said before that
they are a very vulnerable
group, they're very
street savvy.
And when they're clothes start
to get taken over by the big
brands, they go, I don't
want that anymore.
An ongoing campaign for the
milk industry has featured
celebrities from all
walks of life.
But some think the seemingly
innocuous campaign has at
times overstepped
the boundaries.
The milk campaign is one that
I think that's quite
interesting, because they've
been very successful in
getting well known people.
And it's a good segmentation one
as well because they have
sports figures, Cal Ripken or
the Monday Night Football
crew, in sport magazines, aimed
at the sports fans.
And they have the well known
Hollywood celebrities in
general interest magazines.
But the comment I would make is
that there seems to be more
sex appeal than is necessary for
that product which is kind
of associated with you know
family values, however
ill-defined they are.
While companies and businesses
have been advertising their
products and services for
centuries, relatively new
players in the advertising mix
are those who use commercials
and print ads to promote their
positions or ideas.
Politicians were the first ones
to enter that fray and
have created controversies of
their own with ads that many
say are deceptive and
manipulative.
Yet as any candidate for a major
office will tell you,
very few will win
without a large
television advertising budget.
Through the years, public
service announcements and ads
have been credited with
promoting the widespread use
of seat belts, increasing
awareness about the dangers of
drinking and driving,
understanding the effects of
cigarette smoking, and stopping
the spread of
misinformation about AIDS.
In the past, television networks
and stations have
avoided issue advertising.
And although they are more
likely to consider those ads
now, Dan Jaffe points out that
those groups still must clear
several hurdles before a
commercial actually airs.
Getting ads on television
is very difficult.
About a third of the ads that
go on the networks have been
modified in some way because the
networks themselves look
at every ad to decide whether
they think that they are
accurate and appropriate.
In the early days of television,
corporations used
to sponsor and often produce
entire programs. Their names
usually appeared in the title,
and only their commercials ran
during the program.
But in today's cluttered
environment, companies are
sponsoring halftime reports and
sporting events and paying
enormous amounts of money to
have their name and logos
attached to bowl games,
stadiums,
and basketball floors.
Visibility is a powerful
advertising tool, but
over-commercialization
may turn people off.
It goes in waves, where we
get over-saturated with
advertising and people
just tune out.
And also, it really has to
do with the economy.
It's really that the old
capitalism thing, when people
can't buy, they get annoyed
by advertising.
If they have some money,
they like advertising.
So we get waves of saturation
where people tune out, and
then suddenly things turn around
again, or some kind of
brilliant new graphic appears
and people get interested
because people want to be
visually stimulated and they
want to be entertained.
That's what the culture
is all about.
Consumers have several options
when they're offended by
advertising campaigns.
While they can rant and rave
all they want to company
officials and advertising
agencies, perhaps the most
powerful way to express
opposition is to avoid or
boycott the products.
And Lippert thinks parents and
schools should teach children
about advertising.
I think that if the parents
aren't at home seeing through
advertising in television and
knowing how to interpret it,
that there really should be
media literacy courses in
school, and increasingly
there are.
Kids love to watch television.
They love to watch
commercials.
Why not have a course in school,
and not make fun of
it, of how to watch advertising
so that you can
see through it and you can
understand the manipulation
behind it and you can get
out of it what you want
to get out of it.
The remote control and the VCR
have helped push television
advertising standards
to the edge.
Viewers are no longer
captive by a
particular station or network.
They can channel surf during
commercials or record a
favorite program and zap the
ads when they replay it.
Television ads have become
shorter, slicker, and bolder.
They must grab viewer's
attention quickly
and maintain it.
You don't want to be dull, but
you don't want to be so edgy.
So how do you hold that tension
properly, to be able
to then really get the insights
that will lead you to
a responsible conversation which
is nothing more than the
give and take.
And that is the dance
of business, it's
the dance of life.
The tension between advertising
and ethics will
probably never disappear as
the business world becomes
increasingly more global
and more competitive.
The burden to keep advertising
appropriate and truthful falls
on the shoulders of many.
Businesses who advertise,
agencies that create the ads.
media who accept and run the
ads, and consumers who
ultimately decide if the
ad is effective.